Title: Hardening Firefox against Injection Attacks – The Technical Details 
Date: 2020-07-07
Author: Frederik

*This blog post has first appeared on the [Mozilla Attack & Defense blog](https://blog.mozilla.org/attack-and-defense/2020/07/07/hardening-firefox-against-injection-attacks-the-technical-details/) and was co-authored with Christoph Kerschbaumer and Tom Ritter*

In a recent academic publication titled [Hardening Firefox against
Injection
Attacks](https://research.mozilla.org/files/2020/05/hardening_firefox_against_injection_attacks.pdf)
(to appear at [SecWeb – Designing Security for the
Web](https://secweb.work/)) we describe techniques which we have
incorporated into Firefox to provide defense in depth against code
injection attacks. Within this blogpost we are going to provide insights
into the described hardening techniques at a technical level with
pointers to the actual code implementing it. *Note that links to source
code are perma-linked to a recent revision as of this blog post. More
recent changes may have changed the location of the code in question.*

 

### Background on Privilege Separation in Firefox

The security architecture for separating web content and privileged
(chrome) content within Firefox builds upon (1) the security boundaries
provided by process separation and (2) the security boundaries provided
by context separation.

1.  The privileged chrome process is able to perform any action the end
    user has access to. In contrast, the lesser privileged content
    process (used for loading web content) is sandboxed and restricted
    from almost all access to Operating System features or user
    privileges.

2.  The security context of the User Interface and privileged chrome
    code within Firefox is represented by the System-Principal. In
    contrast, the security context of untrusted web content builds upon
    the security context represented by a Content-Principal. (Please
    find details on the different kinds of Principals within Firefox in
    our recent post: [Understanding Web Security Checks in
    Firefox](https://blog.mozilla.org/attack-and-defense/2020/06/10/understanding-web-security-checks-in-firefox-part-1/)).

 

<img src="images/chrome_vs_content-600x428.jpg" width="450" height="321" />

<span id="caption-attachment-150"></span>**Firefox Security
Architecture** showing the separation of privileged chrome code and the
Tabs A, B, and C including DOM windows exhibiting unprivileged content
code.

The two privilege distinctions – a privileged parent process and other
lesser privileged child processes; and the privileged System Principal
Context and the lesser privileged Content and Null Principal Contexts –
both describe mechanisms of privilege distinction within Firefox.
However, the actual mechanism by which privilege is separated is
generally unimportant in the context of privilege escalation attacks,
which our hardening prevents.

While process-based separation is a fairly generic architecture,
Principal-based separation is specific to Gecko – the rendering engine
powering Firefox. Nonetheless, tricking system-principled code into
doing your bidding is just as alarming as a cross-process attack. It is
considered an injection attack and exposes a significant security
bypass.

 

### Securing about: pages

Firefox ships with a variety of built-in pages, commonly referred to as
[about:
pages.](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Mozilla/Firefox/The_about_protocol)
Such about: pages allow the user to view internal browser information or
change settings.

If one were able to inject script into a privileged about: page it would
represent a complete browser takeover in many cases. To reduce this
injection attack surface, we apply a strong Content Security Policy
(CSP) of [default-src
chrome:](https://searchfox.org/mozilla-central/search?q=default-src+chrome%3A&path=&case=false&regexp=false)
to all about: pages. The applied CSP restricts script to only JavaScript
files bundled and shipped with the browser and accessible only via the
Firefox [internal chrome://
protocol](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Mozilla/Chrome_Registration).
Whenever loading any kind of JavaScript, Firefox internally consults its
CSP implementation by calling the function
[ShouldLoad()](https://searchfox.org/mozilla-central/rev/027893497316897b8f292bde48dbb6da2391a331/dom/security/nsCSPContext.cpp#117)
for external resources, or
[GetAllowsInline()](https://searchfox.org/mozilla-central/rev/027893497316897b8f292bde48dbb6da2391a331/dom/security/nsCSPContext.cpp#518)
for inline scripts. If the script to be executed is not allow-listed by
the added CSP then Firefox will block the script execution, rendering
the code injection attack obsolete.

Further, we verify that any newly added about: page within Firefox
exposes a strong CSP by consulting the function
[AssertAboutPageHasCSP()](https://searchfox.org/mozilla-central/rev/2c1092dc68c63f7bad6da6a03c5883a5ab5ff2ca/dom/security/nsContentSecurityUtils.cpp#794).
This function basically acts as a commit guard to our codebase and
ensures that no about: page makes it into the Firefox codebase without a
strong CSP.

Before we started to protect about: pages with a CSP we faced a bug
where text and markup controlled by a web application was reused in a
permission prompt, which led to a Universal Cross-Site Scripting (UXSS)
attack in the browser interface
([CVE-2018-5124](https://www.mozilla.org/en-US/security/advisories/mfsa2018-05/)).
These scripts run with elevated privileges that get access to internal
APIs and can result in a full system compromise. What raises the
severity of such bugs is the high-level nature of the vulnerability and
the highly deterministic nature of the exploit code which allowed
comparably trivial exploitation.

Allowing JavaScript only from packaged sources and not allowing any
inline script in any privileged context limits the attack surface of
arbitrary code execution and provides a strong first line of defense
against code injection attacks.

 

### Restricting Loads in Privileged Contexts

Higher privileged contexts within Firefox have access to APIs that are
capable of modifying the browser settings and its user interface. Most
prominently, about:config, which exposes an API to inspect and update
preferences and settings which allows Firefox users to tailor their
Firefox instance to their specific needs and desires. Being able to set
arbitrary preferences is powerful enough that we treat it as a full
security bypass.

We ensure that privileged APIs (such as those that allow setting
preferences) are restricted to HTML documents and scripts that are part
of the Firefox source code. More precisely, system privileged code
within Firefox should never need to load remote web content, because all
the user interface code is packaged and shipped with the browser itself.

Enforcing additional restrictions on privileged APIs not only fixes an
theoretical attack vector: In June 2019, we were made aware of an active
exploit that combined a JavaScript JIT bug
[(CVE-2019-11707)](https://bugzilla.mozilla.org/show_bug.cgi?id=1544386)
to gain arbitrary code execution with a logic bug in our IPC
(Inter-Process Communication) code
[(CVE-2019-11708)](https://bugzilla.mozilla.org/show_bug.cgi?id=1559858).
The logic bug allowed loading remote web content in the parent process.
In order to gain code execution within the unsandboxed parent process,
the exploit loaded itself in the parent process and exploited the same
JIT engine bug again. We addressed and fixed the specific issues
instantly and shipped a fix to the JIT bug and the IPC method within a
few days.

In addition to fixing the specific problem, and as a defense in depth
mechanism, we started to enforce additional restrictions to eliminate
that entire class of security problems. By adding and consulting the
function
[CanLoadInParentProcess()](https://searchfox.org/mozilla-central/rev/5a4aaccb28665807a6fd49cf48367d47fbb5a19a/docshell/base/nsDocShell.cpp#8863)
Firefox is effectively not allowing documents with a scheme other than
chrome:, about: or resource: to load in the parent process. Adding this
additional restriction limits document loads to the aforementioned
schemes and therefore prevents any remote web document loads in the
parent process.

To systematically restrict all resource loads (document and subresource
loads) into system privileged context or the parent process all loads
consult the function
[CheckAllowLoadInSystemPrivilegedContext()](https://searchfox.org/mozilla-central/source/dom/security/nsContentSecurityManager.cpp#763).
Since Firefox enforces a [Security by
Default](https://blog.mozilla.org/security/2016/11/10/enforcing-content-security-by-default-within-firefox/)
loading mechanism for all resource loads we build our monitoring system
on top of these efforts which allows us to enforce runtime assertions
for every resource load. This security mechanism ensures that Firefox
can only load resources into system privileged context or the parent
process if the resource is packaged and shipped with the browser, hence
eliminating an entire set of privilege escalation attacks.

 

### Restricting Eval in System Privileged Contexts

The JavaScript function eval() provides a powerful yet dangerous tool.
An attacker who could inject strings into our user interface (UI) code
that is then eval-ed would allow the attacker to execute script in a
system privileged context, allowing a complete browser takeover

Please note that our UI is written using standard web technologies such
as HTML and JavaScript. This JavaScript code runs with system
privileges. Relying on internet technologies to write the browser user
interface has a multitude of advantages such as rapid prototyping and
quicker development cycles, but also exposes the risk of injection
attacks.

To provide a defense in depth mechanism against string injection attacks
which would turn into executable code at runtime, we removed all
instances of eval() in system privileged code. By consulting the
function
[IsEvalAllowed()](https://searchfox.org/mozilla-central/rev/2c1092dc68c63f7bad6da6a03c5883a5ab5ff2ca/dom/security/nsContentSecurityUtils.cpp#394)
at runtime we ensure that all calls to eval() are blocked in system
privileged contexts.

Removing all occurrences of eval() in system privileged contexts reduces
the attack surface of arbitrary code execution and hence provides an
additional layer of security against code injection attacks.

 

### Restricting access through X-Ray Vision

Though Firefox has been shipping with a hardening mechanism known as
X-Ray Vision for a multitude of years, X-Ray Vision builds the
foundation for the hardening work we are presenting in this blogpost.
Not having X-Ray vision would render all additional hardening efforts
obsolete, hence it’s worth sketching out fundamentals about that
security mechanism within this blogpost.

Firefox runs JavaScript from a variety of different sources and at a
variety of different privilege levels, and at times these privilege
levels must interact. The security machinery in Firefox ensures that
there is asymmetric access between code at different privilege levels.
In more detail, Firefox ensures that web content code can not access
JavaScript objects created by chrome code, but chrome code can access
objects created by content. However, even the ability to access content
objects can be a security risk for chrome code.

Almost a decade ago, Mozilla realized the importance of secure
interactions between privileged Javascript code belonging to the browser
application and web content script. Within the [Meta Bug
929539](https://bugzilla.mozilla.org/show_bug.cgi?id=929539) and its
dependencies, Firefox created the concept of X-Ray vision to mitigate an
entire class of privilege escalation attacks.

The fundamental principle of [X-Ray
Vision](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Mozilla/Tech/Xray_vision)
is that dynamic content-controlled data is only exposed through
well-defined access points for a given object type. When a privileged
script accesses an object, it sees only the native version of the
object. If any properties of the object have been redefined by web
content, it sees the original implementation, not the redefined version.

X-Ray Vision is implemented by identifying the separation of execution
contexts of JavaScript. Once this identification is made, we can extend
the checks logically. If content code somehow got a reference to an
object from a higher privilege level, then trying to dereference that
handle is where access would actually be blocked. And similarly,
although two origins are the same privilege level insomuch as they are
both content-privileged; they are separate execution contexts and are
also blocked. Hence, X-Ray Vision provides a systematic guard to
eliminate an entire set of privilege escalation problems within Firefox.

 

### Going Forward

Adding layers of security allows us to harden the codebase of Firefox
against all injection attacks we are not aware of or may get introduced
in the future. We encourage contributors, hackers, and bug bounty
hunters to verify there are no flaws in our design. While the provided
mechanisms provide a solid line of defense we would like to call out
that bypassing any of the presented defense in depth mechanisms is
eligible for a [bug
bounty](https://www.mozilla.org/en-US/security/client-bug-bounty/).

  
