Title: Help Test Firefox's built-in HTML Sanitizer to protect against UXSS bugs
Date: 2019-12-06
Slug: test-firefox-xss-sanitizer
Author: Frederik

*This article first appeared on the [Mozilla Security blog](https://blog.mozilla.org/security/2019/12/02/help-test-firefoxs-built-in-html-sanitizer-to-protect-against-uxss-bugs/)*

I recently gave a talk at OWASP Global AppSec in Amsterdam and
summarized the presentation in a blog post about [*how to achieve
"critical"-rated code execution vulnerabilities in Firefox with
user-interface
XSS*](https://frederik-braun.com/firefox-ui-xss-leading-to-rce.html).
The end of that blog posts encourages the reader to participate the bug
bounty program, but did not come with proper instructions. This blog
post will describe the mitigations Firefox has in place to protect
against XSS bugs and how to test them. Our about: pages are privileged
pages that control the browser (e.g., `about:preferences`, which
contains Firefox settings). A successful XSS exploit has to bypass [*the
Content Security Policy (CSP), which we have recently
added*](https://blog.mozilla.org/security/2019/10/14/hardening-firefox-against-injection-attacks/)
but also our built-in XSS sanitizer to gain arbitrary code execution. A
bypass of the sanitizer without a CSP bypass is in itself a
severe-enough security bug and warrants a bounty, subject to the
discretion of the Bounty Committee. See the [*bounty
pag*](https://www.mozilla.org/en-US/security/client-bug-bounty/)[*es*](https://www.mozilla.org/en-US/security/client-bug-bounty/)
for more information, including how to submit findings.

# How the Sanitizer works

The Sanitizer runs in the so-called [*"fragment
parsing"*](https://w3c.github.io/DOM-Parsing/#dfn-fragment-parsing-algorithm)
step of innerHTML. In more detail, whenever someone uses innerHTML (or
similar functionality that parses a string from JavaScript into HTML)
the browser builds a DOM tree data structure. Before the newly parsed
structure is appended to the existing DOM element our sanitizer
intervenes. This step ensures that our sanitizer can not mismatch the
result the actual parser would have created - because it is indeed the
actual parser. The line of code that triggers the sanitizer is in
[*nsContentUtils::ParseFragmentHTML*](https://searchfox.org/mozilla-central/rev/171109434c6f2fe086af3b2322839b346a112a99/dom/base/nsContentUtils.cpp#4683)
and *nsContentUtils::ParseFragmentXML*. This aforementioned link points
to a specific source code revision, to make hotlinking easier. Please
click the file name at the top of the page to get to the newest revision
of the source code. The sanitizer is implemented as an allow-list of
elements, attributes and attribute values in
[*nsTreeSanitizer.cpp*](https://searchfox.org/mozilla-central/source/dom/base/nsTreeSanitizer.cpp).
Please consult the allow-list before testing. **Finding a Sanitizer
bypass is a hunt for** [***Mutated XSS
(mXSS)***](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cross-site_scripting#Mutated_XSS_(mXSS))
**bugs in Firefox** -- Unless you find an element in our allow-list that
has recently become capable of running script.

# How and where to test

A browser is a complicated application which consists of millions of
lines of code. If you want to find new security issues, you should test
the [*latest development version*](https://nightly.mozilla.org/). We
often times rewrite lots of code that isn't related to the issue you
are testing but might still have a side-effect. To make sure your bug is
actually going to affect end users, test [*Firefox
Nightly*](https://nightly.mozilla.org/). Otherwise, the issues you find
in Beta or Release might have already been fixed in Nightly.

# Sanitizer runs in all privileged pages

Some of Firefox's internal pages have more privileges than regular web
pages. For example about:config allows the user to modify advanced
browser settings and hence relies on those expanded privileges. Just
open a new tab and navigate to about:config. Because it has access to
privileged APIs it can not use innerHTML (and related functionality like
outerHTML and so on) without going through the sanitizer.

### Using Developer Tools to emulate a vulnerability

From `about:config`, open The developer tools console (Go to *Tools* in
the menu bar. Select *Web Developers*, then *Web Console*
(Ctrl+Shift+k)). To emulate an XSS vulnerability, type this into the
console: `document.body.innerHTML = '<img src=x onerror=alert(1)>'`
Observe how Firefox sanitizes the HTML markup by looking at the error in
the console:
`“Removed unsafe attribute. Element: img. Attribute: onerror.”` You may
now go and try other variants of XSS against this sanitizer. Again, try
finding an mXSS bug or by identifying an allowed combination of element
and attribute which execute script.

### Finding an actual XSS vulnerability

Right, so for now we have *emulated* the Cross-Site Scripting (XSS)
vulnerability by typing in innerHTML ourselves in the Web Console.
That's pretty much cheating. But as I said above: *What we want to find
are sanitizer bypasses. This is a call to test our mitigations.* But if
you still want to find real XSS bugs in Firefox, I recommend you run
some sort of smart static analysis on the Firefox JavaScript code. And
by smart, I probably do not mean
[*eslint-plugin-no-unsanitized*](https://github.com/mozilla/eslint-plugin-no-unsanitized).

# Summary

This blog post described the mitigations Firefox has in place to protect
against XSS bugs. These bugs can lead to remote code execution outside
of the sandbox. We encourage the wider community to double check our
work and look for omissions. This should be particularly interesting for
people with a web security background, who want to learn more about
browser security. Finding severe security bugs is very rewarding and
we're looking forward to getting some feedback. If you find something,
please consult the [*Bug Bounty
pages*](https://www.mozilla.org/en-US/security/bug-bounty/) on how to
report it.
